---
layout: post
title:  "Pi cluster (SSH and static IP)"
date:   2020-06-24 22:00:00 +0800
categories: jekyll update
---

I am using an Odyssey mini PC with Ubuntu desktop 20.04  for the master node, and three Raspberry Pi 4 Model Bs with Ubuntu server 20.04 for the worker nodes. Please see my previous post [Pi cluster (hardware)](https://zyf0717.github.io/jekyll/update/2020/06/23/pi-clustering-hardware.html) for more details.

SSH is enabled by default on the Ubuntu 20.04 server, so by default SSH is simply:

```
$ ssh ubuntu@<IP address>
```

## 0. IP configurations

To check internal IP address of each machine, use:

```
ip a
```

To check for currently used DNS server IP address

```
systemd-resolve --status | grep Current
```

To display default gateway IP address:

```
ip r
```

## 1. Change hostname

Default hostname of every Pi is ubuntu, which will be confusing if left unchanged. To change hostname of each Pi, use:

```
sudo hostnamectl set-hostname <new hostname> 
```

Run `$ sudo nano /etc/hosts` and add in the following:

```
10.42.0.1 odyssey
10.42.0.139 pi1
10.42.0.140 pi2
10.42.0.141 pi3
```

## 2. Configuring static IP

Make sure that the network interface is not managed by CloudInit. Open the configuration file with `$ sudo nano /etc/cloud/cloud.cfg.d/subiquity-disable-cloudinit-networking.cfg` and append `network: {config: disabled}`.

Open the Netplan configuration file with `sudo nano /etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` and replace everything with: 

```
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    eth0:
      addresses: [10.42.0.141/24]
      gateway4: 10.42.0.1
      nameservers:
        addresses: [10.42.0.1, 255.255.255.0]
```

Run `$ sudo netplan try` to check for syntax errors, by pressing ENTER to keep settings. Network configuration should be accepted if nothing goes wrong.

To make changes permanent run `$ sudo netplan apply` and reboot with `$ sudo reboot`. SSH into the Pi to confirm that a static IP has been set.

## 3. SSH alias

Run `$ sudo nano .ssh/config` on the master node and insert the following to simplify the SSH process to just `$ ssh <Host>`:

```
Host odyssey
User zyf0717
Hostname 10.42.0.1

Host pi1
User ubuntu
Hostname 10.42.0.139

Host pi2
User ubuntu
Hostname 10.42.0.140

Host pi3
User ubuntu
Hostname 10.42.0.141
```

Copy this file into every device with `scp ~/.ssh/config piX:~/.ssh/config`

## 4. Setting up public / private key pairs

On every node run the following command to generate a public and private key pair (default location for is in `~/.ssh/` folder):

```
$ ssh-keygen –t ed25519
```

Each public key will need to be concatenated to the `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` file on every other device. Starting from the master node, ssh into each Pi and run the following command:

```
$ cat ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub | ssh zyf0717@odyssey 'cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys'
```

 Also insert public key of master node into `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` with:

```
$ cat .ssh/id_ed25519.pub >> .ssh/authorized_keys
```

Copy `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` into every worker node with:

```
$ scp ~/.ssh/authorized_keys <Host>:~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

SSH connections can now be established between any nodes with just `ssh <Host>`.

## 5. Cluster command

In the master node, define some shortcuts by adding the following lines to `~/.bashrc`:

```
# To get hostname of all worker nodes.
function clusternodes {
  grep "pi" /etc/hosts | awk '{print $2}' | grep -v $(hostname)
}

# To send command to all worker nodes.
function clustercmd {
  for pi in $(clusternodes); do ssh $pi "$@"; done
}
```

Commands can now be run across all worker nodes, e.g., to reboot cluster, simply run:

```
$ clustercmd sudo reboot
```